# FirstSuspension
 Survival analysis of the first suspension of the school year
 
 Hoffman's qualifying paper for the Harvard Graduate School of Education
 2014
 
 Committee: John Willett (chair), Daniel Koretz, Richard Murnane
 
Improving the Estimation of the Risk of School Suspension Using Continuous-Time Survival Analysis: 
A Case Study in the Public Middle Schools in One Metropolitan Region

For 10 years I was a middle-school principal and a high-school assistant principal. On most days of the school year, I assigned formal discipline to the handful of students whose misbehavior was brought to my attention. Many times, I suspended students out-of-school, following district procedures and the approach to discipline advocated by my superiors. Furthermore, since my first day as an administrator, I was made acutely aware of the racial dynamics in schools, particularly regarding the disproportionality in school discipline for Black and Hispanic students that has also been documented extensively in recent scholarship (Beck & Muschkin, 2012; Gregory, Cornell, & Fan, 2011; Kinsler, 2011; Petras, Masyn, Buckley, Ialongo, & Kellam, 2011; Skiba et al., 2011) .
My experiences as a school principal and my subsequent reading of the scholarly literature have motivated me to scrutinize disciplinary policies in schools more formally. Thus, here in my qualifying paper (QP), I have conducted a case study to explore the out-of-school suspension of students in the public schools in one metropolitan region. In particular, I bring an innovative analytic framework—survival analysis—to bear, to improve the estimation of suspension rates and describe the timing of suspension using a finer lens than others have done. Broadly speaking, I extend prior work on school discipline by investigating whether middle-school students are suspended from school, and if so, when, during the school year, these school suspensions occurred. 
I begin by analyzing when, during the course of the 2009-10 academic year, students were at the greatest risk of being first suspended from school (that is, given that they had not been suspended at an earlier point in the academic year). I explain my use of the term risk more formally, both in terms of who is at risk, and also when students are at relatively higher or lower rates of occurrence of first suspension. Given that I have worked with data in which time to suspension was measured continuously, I fitted a series of Cox-regression models (Cox, 1972) to first investigate whether there were differences in this risk, by student grade level. Then, I document the continued pattern of disproportionality in the risk of school suspensions by race. 
For the last 40 years, researchers in fields like criminology (e.g. Dugan, Lafree, & Piquero, 2005) medicine (e.g. Heikinheimo et al., 2013), and sociology (e.g. Zheng & Thomas, 2013) have used the strategy of Cox (1972) regression analysis to study analogous topics. Cox-regression analysis is certainly the most popular technique for modeling rates of event occurrence in continuous-time, because it is both elegant and computationally practical (Cleves, Gould, Gutierrez, & Stata Corporation., 2010). In fact, as of March 7, 2014, Cox’s seminal paper detailing this method had been cited 27,942 times on the Web of Science! However, I am unaware of any other researcher who has applied Cox-regression analysis to the investigation of the phenomenon of out-of-school suspensions, as I have here. 
I have organized the QP into five major sections, following this introduction. First, in the Background and Context section, I review the literature to provide a rationale for my investigation of whether students have been suspended, historically, from school. I focus on disparities by race and ethnicity generally, and for middle-school students in particular. In this section, I argue that survival analysis is a plausible strategy for addressing the “when” question, in estimating the risk of suspension during the school year. I end this section by stating my specific research questions. Second, in my Research Design section, I describe the research site, the features of the dataset, the sample of students, and the procedures that I use to address my specific research questions. Third, I present my Findings from this analysis. Fourth, I discuss the limitations of my analysis in a section on Threats to Validity. Fifth, I synthesize and review the meaning and significance of the findings in a Discussion section. 

